---
layout: post
date: 2018-10-19 13:06
thumbnail: https://texilaeconference.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/information-technology.jpg
title: Information Technologies reshaping the future
published: true
---

There is no doubt that Information Technology plays a really vital role in our daily lives, it’s applications, and potentials have not only tremendous effect on our present but also on our future. We have already witnessed it that how rapidly a change is caused by the technology. Day in and day out new technologies are being merged into the industry. Society is highly accepting and embracing the revolution. Evolution of Telephone to cell phone and from cell phones to smart phones brought a huge revolution in all industries in the world. It is not an over statement if we say that information technology is becoming the most integral part of every field. It is a field of greatest flexibility and greatest opportunities.

<!--more-->

“Technology is a forward leap for humans as species of universe it has changed our world and will continue to change our destination, but just in a faster manner.”

We are living in the age of Data. Where data is everything. It is biggest asset of any individual or an organization. Data today gives meaning to everything. As a fact, 90% of all data humans have ever created is just generated during previous decade, revolution of social media and smart phones can be held responsible for this. Every human connected on internet, on social media, and on other platforms has participated to create this immense amount of data.

People are so much fascinated about Information Technology because it’s cheaper, reliable, faster and easier to perform any task using IT related technologies, now online shopping, paying online bills, and online banking, are essential part of our daily life. People from different fields are working together on many projects online. Working on projects as a community in a collaborative environment are bringing huge revolution in every field.

As quoted by the great scientist Stephen hawking:

“We are all now connected by the Internet, like neurons in a giant brain.”

When we are talking about Information Technology, we are generally referring to technologies that are merged together in a systematic way to transfer information, in the form of text, audio, video, graphics etc. Then there is a whole Virtual World of connected technologies sharing tons of information globally in just a second: we call Internet.

Internet is bringing minds together to work on issues that are of common interest in a collaborative environment. everyone with sufficient knowledge of particular subject can participate in development of his/her field. This is what we already have witnessed, what’s next? The future of internet is internet of things. Every object on planet will be connected with every other object, they will share tons of information with each other, making objects smarter and intelligent, and we will be able to know the world as never before. We will be able to manage resources very efficiently, take an example of electricity. The distribution of electricity will be totally dependent on the consumption. Where there will be less devices active to consume energy, an autonomous system will be activated to inform the grid to slow down the power production to save both fuel and energy.

After widely access of internet through smart phones, industries were left with no choice but to adopt and embrace this revolution, accepting these changes were proved to be revolutionary both for companies, and for customers. The online world introduced the Idea of online businesses, where people (buyer and seller) can directly communicate with each other without any central authority. If you have any skills, services or products to sale, then you can sale them on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, email or on any online site with potential customers. These all things together, at last caused low prices and increased the quality of products or quality of services. Hence, a new era of customer centered markets are coming into existence. Companies are in direct communication with their customers. MIS (Management Information Systems) software help companies highlight customer trends, their requirements in a more convenient way. Now company can figure out which product particularly has maximum demand in customers, which month is best to launch a new a product. Companies can know their strengths and their weaknesses to align their goals according to customer’s requirements. And these are facts about the business sector companies only.

When we are talking about the impacts of information technology on the future of society it seems incomplete without talking about Artificial intelligence.
Artificial intelligence is the area of computer science that deals with ability of computers to think behave and act according to human nature, with AI computers and machines can be able to provide solutions that were challenging and had consumed years of human research. Computers and Expert Systems of AI can perform these tasks swiftly and faster because machines or computers can access enormous data, as compared to humans with limited calculation power and data. Its applications are revolutionary and life changing.

AI is the field with the potential to change the entire human race. Accepting and appreciating AI as the field of future many technology companies, like Google, Baidu, Tesla, are investing a huge amount of their income in AI research.

According to Forbes:

“Tech giants including Baidu and Google spent between $20B to $30B on AI in 2016, with 90% of this spent on R&D and deployment, and 10% on AI acquisitions.” Columbus, L (2017).

Basically application of AI are the applications of human intelligence. AI can be implemented in every domain. Expert Systems are helping people from diverse fields in their subjects. Doctors are taking help of expert systems to diagnose the Cancer and other disease prior to the worst case scenario. Automobile industry is investing its huge revenue to make autonomous transportation systems. Internet of Things (IOT) and AI are being merged together to overcome the issues of security, which is one of the biggest threats in IOT. Mobile phones are being smarter enough to respond to your voice, facial expressions, they can suggest things to eat as per your health, recognize you and much more.

It is estimated that AI will be the leading industry of the future. Here are some figures elaborating per year investment on AI in USD from year 2016 to 2025.

AI enabled Nano-technology chips will be inserted into your body that will circulate your body. if there’s a virus in your body they will strengthen your body against that Virus and send an alert to your doctor for medical help. Nano bots will enable you to keep track of your health record, your daily diet, calories you take in and calories you burn out during the exercise or any work. It will completely emotionalize health care industry. Imagine a future where Machine and Humans are integrated against a common goal, to serve the humanity. There will be no incurable disease, no starvation, no energy crises.

During the financial crises of 2008, an unknown person or group of people naming himself Satoshi Nakamoto came up with the idea of digital currency, although there were many currencies already available but the problem was there were no validations of how many times the currency was already used. Since everything on computer can be copied who will verify that digital currency is not used more than two times.
So, he came up with idea of block chain: is a decentralized system of thousands of inter connected systems. Where each node can know what is happening on every other node, and every node keeps record of all the activities conducted on each node. Let’s take an example: I have to transfer a bitcoin, from owner A to B, then the information regarding transaction is delivered to every other node, called block chain network. information is list of transaction history that user A has transferred 1 bitcoin to user B. making your copy of bitcoin totally invalid to be used again. This added both credibility and security to the Bitcoin network. If you wanted to use that bit coin again than you will possibly have to hack into all computers connected to bitcoin network, change the contents of all the transaction history in each node, with all the state of art encryption and decryption techniques. Which for is thought to be most difficult. Bitcoin is a decentralized network where you can share your Virtual Money without need of any central authority such as banks, pay pal or payoneer etc. which charge great amount of money to perform a transaction. Using bitcoins block chain network you can share it anywhere, you can share it through email, YouTube and through fb instantaneously.

Bitcoin is revolutionary, in a sense that you don’t have to pay any extra money to the 3rd party for performing a transaction, buyer and seller are in direct contact with each other to exchange money. Without losing a single penny of it. It’s secure, its reliable and the trust is system based, every system on block chain network works autonomously to build a trusted environment for us to perform transactions.

But the technology what we can regard as truly revolutionary is not bit coin but the underlying architecture on which bitcoin works. Block chain technology as most people believe can be revolutionary. because if we connect every car travelling on the road with each other, every car will have access to the position, speed, and destination of other car moving along with it. It will reduce the chances of an accident to great extent.

Every time a new idea has arrived in Information Technology, great minds have worked on them to solve problems, which were never solved before. In 1991 World Wide Web was made publicly available at that time nobody imagined that what this will totally change the world we see it today, no one can possibly predict that it will bring us this far in that small amount of time. Every time new technology is being introduced. AI, IoT, Bitcoin and blockchain are just at their start, nobody exactly knows what they hold for future.
